Air Quality & Health in NYC
================
Ixtaccihuatl Obregon (iho2104), Ru Jin Lim (rl3411), Lupe Antonio
(ga2612), Dylan Koproski (dfk2117), Gustavo Garcia-Franceschini
(geg2145)
2023-11-10

## Project Proposal

          It is well established that long term exposure to poor air
quality is associated with negative health outcomes, particularly in
urban areas with high population density. While it has relatively clean
air when compared to many other urban environments, New York City still
attributes thousands of deaths to poor air quality annually. Thus, there
is a need to further understand where NYC’s air quality is the worst
and, more importantly, where air quality is responsible for negative
health outcomes. Our project will first explore the correlation between
poor air quality and rates of lung disease in New York City. We will
also investigate indirect ways air pollution impacts health by
researching the impact air quality has on walkability and animal
distribution within the City. The main goal of our project is to
highlight the negative consequences that poor air quality has on the
health of communities in New York City and highlight which neighborhoods
in the city would benefit most from policies to reduce air pollution.  
          A collection of final products will be presented to
communicate our findings and outcomes. There will be a dashboard with
exploratory data analysis for each data set used. A detailed report with
background information, methods, key findings and results, limitations,
and possible future directions of the project. An interactive map will
be integrated into the website to represent and introduce a deeper
understanding of the project’s findings.  
          For this project, we will be combining multiple datasets for
our analyses. The first is an up to date air quality surveillance
dataset from NYC OpenData accessible here
[here](https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Environment/Air-Quality/c3uy-2p5r).
The dataset contains measurements of common air pollutants in NYC
neighborhoods over various time intervals. The dataset also includes
some other air-pollutant related statistics including, but not limited
to, “Asthma emergency departments visits due to Ozone” and “Annual
vehicle miles traveled”. Further, we also plan to use a geographical
location dataset accessible
[here](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/tiger-line-shapefile-2019-2010-nation-u-s-2010-census-5-digit-zip-code-tabulation-area-zcta5-na)
to help geocode neighborhoods for anticipated maps using the Leaflet
package. Finally, while we do not yet have a specific dataset, we will
pull on a dataset containing prevalence/incidence of lung-related
diseases in New York City which we will compare to areas with poor air
quality.  
          Using the aforementioned data, we plan on creating a number of
visualizations and models. Initially, we want to generate an interactive
leaflet map showing relative amounts of air pollutants in NYC
neighborhoods. We may make multiple maps or overlay multiple maps, each
representing a unique air pollutant. We also plan on making several
statistical models in an attempt to quantify a correlation between
density of certain air pollutants and lung/respiratory diseases such as
asthma. We plan to make multiple models for different diseases and will
use previous research to inform which air pollutants are likely to have
the most pronounced effect.  
          With this data, we anticipate a number of coding challenges.
First, the air quality data is very messy and includes a lot of
extraneous data and entry mistakes which will need to be filtered out
and/or revised so that future analyses go smoothly. Second, we may
encounter difficulty geocoding each of the locations to have an accurate
zip code and gps coordinate data for leaflet mapping.  
          To ensure efficient progression of the final project, our
proposed timeline has been divided into distinct phases. The collection
and organization of data sets will be completed by November 17th. By
November 27th, the expected focus will turn to the creation of
visualizations to accurately represent the data and mission of the
project. Statistical modeling with appropriate insight and conclusions
will be developed by December 4th. The final report and website will be
completed and live to present in class by December 8th.
